2The Ultimate AP English Literature Reading List
June 14, 2016	 11 min read in	Test Prep
Wondering which literary works to study to prepare for the AP English Literature exam?

It can be overwhelming to choose. So let me help.

I’ve categorized 35 different literary works to help you easily digest the key elements. Using my commentary as help, you’ll be able to prepare your own AP English Literature reading list to better prepare for a 5.

 



The Top 10 AP English Literature Reading List

You can’t argue with hard statistics. The College Board has kept track of the most frequently cited the AP English Literature works from 1971 through 2014. This portion of the list is devoted directly to these ten works. It could be of great importance that you at the very least gain some familiarity with these titles, as the likelihood that one of these will appear somewhere on the test is pretty high.

1. Invisible Man by Ralph Ellison

Ellison’s Invisible Man is a long read but it is definitely worth the time spent due to the way it tackles race and bigotry and its effect on the minds of the parties involved in issues of race. Invisible Man covers race, identity, ideology, and stereotypes. Further, it tells the story of a marginalized character who eventually overcomes alienation, invisibility, and defies a society that is unable and unwilling to recognize the individuality of the black man. This is the most frequently referenced title on the AP English Literature reading list at 26 citations since 1971.

2. Wuthering Heights by Emily Bronte

Wuthering Heights is one of the most widely regarded pieces on the AP English Literature reading list. WH is a good example of Gothic Romanticism that deals heavily with questions of emotion and violence. It’s particularly accessible and discusses class and gender comfortably from the perspective of a woman. This is one of the most frequently cited literary works on the AP Literature exam. It has been included in some form or fashion on 20 different years’ tests since 1971.

I personally recommend analyzing this piece while looking out for the poetry and mastery of composition that Emily Bronte wields in her only published novel. Wuthering Heights is long but meaningful read.

Wuthering Heights is one of the most frequently cited literary works on the AP Literature exam. CLICK TO TWEET
3. Great Expectations by Charles Dickens

Great Expectations is another Victorian novel that is very frequently included on the AP Literature exam. Since 1971, it has been cited 18 times. It is considered a Victorian Bildungsroman, German for “Novel of Formation,” simply described as a coming-of-age story.

The Ultimate Student's Starter Kit to AP English Literature


Become an insider: 
Not sure where to start when it comes to preparing for AP English Literature?

No worries! We've got your back with this 119-page free AP English Literature resource featuring crash course reviews and tips to tackle the exam.

Email
Yes! I want in.
We value your privacy. We will never give your e-mail to anyone else.

Great Expectations is probably one of the most versatile titles on this list because it addresses many of the Victorian-era genres of the novel, including satire, crime, Silver Fork, Newgate, Gothic, serial fiction, romance, politics, and history. Read Dickens’ Great Expectations as if you need to mark a trail to get back to the beginning, your starting point. With Dickens, it’s about the particular points he mentions. Those points throughout the story inform your reading of Great Expectations, not the purpose of the novel itself.

Make sure you don’t focus on plot with any Dickens piece. Plots are his weakest point. Concentrate on instances of his beautiful use of language.

4. King Lear by William Shakespeare

King Lear, referenced 17 times since 1971, is the most frequently cited work by Shakespeare.

King Lear is a brutal play containing themes ranging from familial love and duty to anger and deception. It’s a play that provides you with many different elements of story to discuss as well as elements of style. The actual story is too complicated to briefly summarize, so trust the numbers and read this play before taking the test.

5. Crime and Punishment by Fyodor Dostoevsky

The main theme of Crime and Punishment is redemption via suffering. This is another long but worthwhile read at 545 pages. The purpose of Crime and Punishment is to provide a psychological analysis of the young Raskolnikov’s crime to reveal how this psychological analysis itself keeps us imprisoned. Intellectualizing events, says Dostoevsky, keeps us imprisoned.

As the name tells us, Crime and Punishment and their relationship to each other are major themes in the story. Think about questions of sacrifice when reading studying this piece. Nihilism, the superhero complex, alienation, and poverty are also analyzed at length.

6. Heart of Darkness by Joseph Conrad

Heart of Darkness is lauded on many of the AP English Literature prep message boards as a go-to literary work for the free response section with good reason. It’s a relatively short novella and an interesting read involving mystery, psychology, and adventure. Heart of Darkness is particularly useful in questions about the modern world in that it was somewhat prophetically written. It deals with the question of imperialist greed particularly pointedly.

Above all else, Heart of Darkness effectively explores and answers questions about morality and how the ambiguity of right and wrong can justify actions. Keep this in mind.

7. Jane Eyre by Charlotte Bronte

Jane Eyre is a highly cited Victorian Romantic novel. At its core, this is a story of a woman yearning for more than what traditional society would allow her to have. Not only is it well known, it’s more relevant today due to the recent push for social equity for women.

8. The Adventures of Huckleberry Finn by Mark Twain

Huck Finn is probably one of the best-known titles on this list among American students and with good reason. It’s rich and complex, yet decipherable by students. If, perhaps, you’re asked about the era of Slavery or Reconstruction, Huck Finn should really come to mind. It relentlessly discusses slavery and racism and the hypocrisy of civilized society. Consider the Mississippi River a symbol for remaining in the middle of the road on issues of race and use that to inform your reading of Huck Finn.

9. Moby Dick by Herman Melville

Moby Dick is universally accepted as an expansive, masterful work of fiction. However, Melville himself described this novel as a meditation on America. Read key portions of this text at least and gain an understanding of Melville’s particular use of symbolism. There are many pertinent symbols that may appear on the AP English Literature exam.

10. A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man by James Joyce

Another bildungsroman, coming-of-age story, A Portrait of the Artist as a Young Man is an examination of how morality and religion can confine the artist. A Portrait reflects Joyce’s own development as a young boy through adulthood at university. Read A Portrait with an eye for Joyce’s stream of consciousness style. As Stephen, the main character, develops morally and psychologically, the style of Joyce’s writing adapts and grows, so to speak. Utilize this title on questions of how style can inform the meaning of the development of characters.

Start your AP English Lit Exam Prep today

The Lost Generation

It could be of use to you to compartmentalize your reading list in terms of time period. For instance, take the Lost Generation. Many of the most frequently cited literary works from 1971 to 2014 were written by Lost Generation, World War I era, authors. Not only is this an interesting time period that seems to be receiving more attention as the years draw on, many of the following titles from this era reflect the distinct American voice in literature in a lyrical, interesting, and unique way.

11. Their Eyes Were Watching God by Zora Neale Hurston

Hurston’s Their Eyes Were Watching God is a good example of a stylistic masterwork, which you can benefit from knowing. Hurston juxtaposes the Southern Black dialect with the voice of a literary narrator. If you’re asked about her work, the chances are that an understanding of her style and structure will score you points.

12. The Great Gatsby by F. Scott Fitzgerald

Probably one of the best-known Lost Generation literary works, The Great Gatsby has become iconic in high school English Literature education. F. Scott Fitzgerald’s work has come to represent the Jazz Age in America. If you were asked about early-20th century American society, The Great Gatsby would be a kind of touchstone work to analyze.

13. As I Lay Dying by William Faulkner

Faulkner’s As I Lay Dying, his fifth novel, would be a good example for you to use if asked about stream of consciousness, how that style develops tone, and how that style aids in character development. It’s written in 59 chapters from 15 points of view that develop each character in manageable chunks, which is made much more easily understood by the intimate tone of stream of consciousness writing. Furthermore, it’s viewed as part of the foundation of the Southern Renaissance.

14. The Sound and the Fury by William Faulkner

Faulkner’s fourth novel, The Sound and the Fury, is another exercise in style. He used stream of consciousness writing once more to tell a personal story of fear about the corruption of family values. The Sound and the Fury provides, most of all, a pathway to impress a reader. This is a difficult book to decipher, but, if you can get a handle on how Faulkner utilizes point of view within it, this piece can be of great value to you in both the multiple choice and free response sections of the exam.